---
layout: daily
date: 2020-08-03
title: Distro Hopping
---

## First Post!

This is the beginning of an experiment where I write a short post every day.
The goal is to build up a log of what was at my mind at various points in time
so that I may spot trends or re-visit states of mind from the past. The average
post will likely be shorter and less specific than this one, but if I do it right
there will be one per day.

I've configured this site so that daily posts will appear at {% local daily | /daily %}.
They may optionally contain a title (as this one does).

## Distro Hopping

I've been spending a long time over the past few weeks experimenting with FreeBSD and OpenBSD,
and even went so far as to install FreeBSD on my laptop (replacing archlinux) to see if
it is viable as a daily driver (so far so good!). Every now and again I flirt with the idea
of moving away from archlinux to something _even more_ minimal. Setting up FreeBSD was mostly
painless once I worked out how to get the trackpad on my Lenovo T470 to work (which was _harrowing_
(if you're having trouble with this too, read [this](https://github.com/stevebob/dotfiles/blob/master/README.FreeBSD.md))).

There's nothing about arch
(or linux in general for that matter) that I find particularly problematic. Hating on systemd
has become something of a meme at this point, but I haven't done enough research to have strong
feelings one way or another.

A phrase I've found myself repeating recently is "archlinux was a good OS for my twenties".
I'm 28, and I've been using arch for at least 6 years as the main operating system on all my
computers. Being on the bleeding edge hasn't been as chaotic as one might think. Notable
exceptions include gnome2 being upgraded to gnome3 (a completely different
desktop environment) with no warning, and pixel font support being pulled from almost all applications
(it was really just pulled from harfbuzz), which was a blessing in disguise as it lead me to discover
[st](http://st.suckless.org/) which I've been happily using ever since.
It was fun and exciting and it taught me a lot. The [wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/) is by far the
most reliable and comprehensive source of unix knowledge I've found, and I'm sure I'll continue to rely
on it regardless of which OS I run in my thirties.
